---
layout:     post
title:      ICSE 2024
date:       2024-04-28 09:00:00 EDT
categories: blog
---

Last week, I visited the beautiful city of Lisbon, Portugal to present my first
lead-author paper, _Semantic Analysis of Macro Usage for Portability_, at
ICSE 2024.

I attended both the main conference and the CHASE workshop, and while most of
the speakers and their presentations did not impress me, there were a number of
exceptional presentations. Note that I wasn't able to attend all the talks (that
would be impossible since multiple talks were begin given simultaneously
throughout the event), but out of the ones I attended, these were by far the
best:

- _A Journey Into the Emotions of Software Developers_ by Nicole Novielli: Dr.
  Novielli gave the opening keynote for CHASE, and it did not disappoint. Her
  insights into how developers' emotions affect their productivity were both
  interesting and intuitive. For example, in her research she has found that
  developers tend to perform better when they're happy and worse when they're
  sad. I am currently helping organize an HCI study on the biometrics of
  developers while they debug code in group settings, and wanted to ask Dr.
  Novielli for some advice, but unfortunately did not get the chance.

- _The Surprising Implications of Realism for Human Factors Research_ by Paul
  Ralph: It was surprising that one of the CHASE keynotes was a talk about
  philosophy! Dr. Ralph unfortunately arrived late, and his talk was initially
  hampered by technical difficulties, but despite these issues he still managed
  to give a captivating presentation. I honestly felt like I was listening to a
  Jordan Peterson talk at certain points, and I am now definitely more curious
  to learn more about Critical Realism and other schools of philosophy.

- _Why People Contribute Software Documentation_ by Deeksha M. Arya: This was
  the first non-keynote talk at CHASE that really impressed me, and it ended up
  being one of the best talks I saw at all of ICSE. The presentation was
  carefully crafted with fun yet simple animations, and Deeksha had clearly
  practiced giving her presentation beforehand. I had the chance to talk with
  Deeksha after the talk and connected with her on LinkedIn, she was very nice!

- _Code Impact Beyond Disciplinary Boundaries: Constructing A Multidisciplinary
  Dependency Graph and Analyzing Cross-Boundary Impact_ by Gengyi Sun: This talk
  stood out to me because Gengyi managed to be funny while also explaining her
  work very well.

- _The Devil Is in the Command Line: Associating the Compiler Flags With the
  Binary and Build Metadata_ by Gunnar Kudrjavets: I'll be honest, I'm not sure
  if I liked this talk or not. On one hand, Gunnar's slides consisted almost
  entirely of text, which I normally don't like because it divides my attention
  between listening to the speaker and reading the text on the slides. On the
  other hand, Gunnar is a clear communicator, and the text that was on her
  slides was short, simple, and obviously relevant to what she was saying. I
  didn't really understand the point of this talk (can't just export compiler
  flags to a `compile_commands.json` file by using CMake or by intercepting a
  build system with `bear` or `scan-build`?), but I am curious to attend more of
  Gunnar's presentations.

- _Classifying Source Code: How Far Can Compressor-based Classifiers Go?_ by
  Zhou Yang: Zhou was a great and humorous presenter.

- _An Ensemble Method for Bug Triaging using Large Language Models_ by Atish
  Kumar Dipongkor: Full disclosure, Atish and I are friends and work together in
  the same lab at UCF. Personal bias aside, Atish is still an amazing presenter.
  He is passionate about his work and can convey complex topics clearly and
  concisely.

- _Using an LLM to Help With Code Understanding_ by Daye Nam: Daye's
  presentation was excellent. Similar to Deeksha's presentation, Daye's was
  masterfully crafted and she presented her work very well.

- _Predicting open source contributor turnover from value-related discussions:
  An analysis of GitHub issues_ by Jack Jamieson: I really liked Jack's
  presentation because it got straight to the point and was readily
  comprehensible.

- [My own talk!](https://youtu.be/OU7kh0YX-Kk).

I would recommend keeping an eye on all these presenters, and if you get the
chance to attend their future talks, go for it! I know I will :)

Finally, I realize that in this post I haven't really described what I consider
to be a good presentation. That's because I plan on dedicating a future post to
that topic. I plan to have that post out by the end of May, and when I do I'll
link it here. Basically, all the talks I've listed in this post follow most, if
not all, of the tenets I'm going to outline in that future post.
