---
layout: post
title: What makes a good presentation
date: 2024-06-01 09:00:00 EDT
categories: blog
---

My mentors have shown me what makes for a good presentation, and now I can't
un-see the fact that most presentations are just awful. After reading this post
you won't be able to un-see it either - and you'll learn how to stand out from
the crowd by making an excellent presentation instead.

## It's easy to make a bad presentation on accident

The first reason that most presentations are boring is that for most people it's
easier and more intuitive to make a boring presentation than it is to make an
exciting one. For example, many people think it's a good idea to end their talk
with a "Questions" slide. This seems natural: many presentations end with a Q&A
session, so it "makes sense" to have a slide indicating that the Q&A session has
begun. In reality though, such "Questions" slides are utterly useless. I explain
why in more detail in the
[next section](#tenets-for-making-excellent-presentations), however the biggest
reason is that "Questions" slides get the longest screen time of any of the
slides of a talk while simultaneously providing no actual content. Instead, a
far better approach is end one's talk with a well-organized conclusion slide
that advertises oneself while simultaneously reiterating their presentation's
key takeaways. This is better because it reminds the audience who the presenter
is and why the listeners should care about what they just said, and gives people
a foothold for asking questions about the work. It's of course much harder to
make a proper conclusion slide though, so that's one reason why they are less
commonly seen.

The next (and perhaps more important) reason that people make inferior
presentations is that they were simply never taught how to make superior ones.
Again, most people don't know how to make good presentations to begin with, and
so most therefore aren't qualified to give advice on how to compose a fine
presentation. This leads to a positive feedback loop where the blind lead the
blind, and in the end hardly anyone knows how to put together a decent set of
slides!

At this point you're probably thinking, "OK *genius*, so if most presentations
suck, how about you stop complaining about them and tell me how to make one that
doesn't?" The answer is simple: Just watch the [Simon Peyton Jones
talk](https://youtu.be/sT_-owjKIbA?si=cFhFNPJuER4eY3vw) on how to give a great
presentation. That's it, just watch that talk and you'll be a certified grade-A
presenter!

...Just kidding of course. Don't get me wrong, that talk is really good, and you
should try to follow most of SPJ's presentation advice most of the time.
However, his talk is very high-level, and for people who are absolute beginners
at giving talks (and I contend that most people are), there is not enough
concrete actionable advice to follow. Simply put, SPJ leaves out many of the
finer, more granular details on how to forge and deliver a captivating
presentation. So here's my (opinionated) list of things to do to make a
magnificent presentation that will earn you the recognition you deserve for all
your hard work!

## Tenets for making excellent presentations

### Go light on the text, heavy on the visuals

You should strive to have as few words on your slides as possible without
sacrificing clarity because it will make it easier for people to pay attention
to and understand your talk. Any words on your slides will compete with you for
your audience's attention, so by having fewer words on your slides, your
audience will more easily be able to focus on you and what you are saying. This
also makes it easier for the audience to understand what you are saying as well,
because their attention won't be divided between you and your slides.

On the other hand, you *should* go out of your way to add fun, simple visuals to
your talk to help explain or complement what you are saying. You can leverage
the old adage, "a picture is worth a thousand words" to your advantage by using
images to explain complex concepts clearly and concisely. The correct image can
help the audience comprehend what you are trying to say far faster than text
can, and without nearly as much cognitive overhead on the listener's end. This
means that they'll understand what you are trying to say more quickly and
easily, and as a result will be more likely to keep listening to you.

I recommend using [flaticon](https://www.flaticon.com) for images.
[Dr. Kevin Moran](https://www.kpmoran.com/) (the winner of the 2024 ACM SigSoft
Early Career Researcher Award) recently recommended it to me, and I had great
success when I used it to make my
[ICSE 2024 talk](https://youtu.be/OU7kh0YX-Kk?si=Wlj-e6xaGDlFLhi3).

"But Brent," you may be thinking, "how can I explain my super complex
presentation topic without words?" This brings me to my next point...

### Treat your talk like a sales pitch

Craft your presentation as if you were making a high-level (i.e., not very
detailed) advertisement to deliver to potential investors of your work. The
point of the talk is *not* to explain every little detail about your work, but
to *excite* the audience and encourage them to learn more about it (e.g. by
collaborating with you, reading your paper, buying you product, or asking you
questions). For instance, if you were to give a talk about a new battery you
invented, you would just say "You can save money by buying my batteries, because
they last 40% longer than other batteries and thus don't need to be replaced as
often." You would want to avoid talking about the specifics as to *how* your
batteries manage to last so long, since your audience more than likely would not
care about these details.

Put another way: don't tell the audience all the cool things about your
idea/product/technique, and expect them to realize on their own why it's a great
piece of work that they should care about. Instead, just tell the audience why
they should care about your great new idea, and provide a very brief intuition
as to how it works. Furthermore, by omitting such details from your main
presentation, you give the audience very obvious questions to ask that you can
more easily prepare for. Speaking of which...

### Anticipate and prepare for questions

Predict the sorts of questions your audience will ask ahead of time and prepare
to answer them. This will show the audience that you are knowledgable about your
presentation subject, and earn you more of their respect. One great way to do
this is to prepare a first draft of your slides with too much detail, and as you
refine your presentation, gradually cut unnecessary details out of the main talk
and move them to an extra section after your talk's conclusion solely for
answering questions about these details. It may feel like extra work to prepare
slides that may never get used if the audience doesn't ask the questions you
expect them to ask, but if you're going to cut the content out of the slides
anyway it doesn't require much effort to just append them to the end of the
presentation instead. Moreover, with judicious content pruning you can subtly
guide the audience to ask the exact questions you want them to ask by leaving
seemingly obvious omissions from the main presentation. This must be done
carefully though, otherwise you run the risk of leaving too many apparently
obvious details out of your talk and looking like a fool. Unfortunately I don't
have any concrete advice on the best way to do this (yet).

While all presenters should prepare for questions, the approach of putting extra
slides for questions at the end of your presentation may not work so well if you
plan to accept questions in the middle of your talk instead of waiting to take
questions at the end. This is because you should...

### Only move forward

You should never go back to a previous slide while giving your talk because
doing so makes it harder to follow what you are saying. People will understand
your presentation more easily if it flows smoothly from one slide to the next.
Furthermore, if you need to go back to a previous slide to explain something on
a later slide, that suggests that your slides were not prepared in the
appropriate order to begin with. Astute members of the audience *will* notice
this, suspect that you don't really know what you are talking about, and choose
to stop listening to you. To prevent this from happening you should prepare and
practice presenting your slides from start to finish without stopping or going
back. The first step to doing this is to...

### Nail the first impression

If your presentation is an advertisement for your work, then your first slide is
the advertisement for the advertisement. It serves two purposes: to inform and
intrigue. When creating the first slide, be sure to include the obvious details
such as the title of the work, the names of the authors (perhaps accompanied by
images of them) and their institutions, the names of any agencies that funded
the work, and the presentation venue and date. This helps people attending your
talk confirm that they are in the right room, and makes it easier for others to
find your talk online in the future. If the first author is not the one giving
the talk, make that clear on the title slide as well by writing the name of the
author presenting the work in bold and by including images of all the works'
authors (assuming space allows for this).

When you present your first slide do not say the name of your talk, because the
title of your talk is on the first slide anyway and your audience (presumably)
can read. This advice is even more important to follow if you are presenting at
a conference because the session organizer will probably read the title of your
talk before you even begin presenting as well. Instead of reading the title of
your talk, introduce yourself and give a very brief overview of what you will be
talking about. For example, when I gave my ICSE 2024 talk I did not say, "Hello
everyone, today I'm presenting the work *Semantic Analysis of Macro Usage for
Portability*". I began my talk by saying, "Hi everyone, my name is Brent, I am a
PhD student at the University of Central Florida, and today I'm excited to talk
with you all about macros". You want to garner the audience's interest early on
and build "attention momentum" (a phrase I just made up and am already thinking
about patenting), so that they'll be willing to focus on your whole talk without
losing interest. Show the audience how much you care about what you're about to
talk about, and it can rub off on them. In the words of
[Dale Carnegie](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/868021-to-be-interesting-be-interested),
the best way to be interesting is to be interested.

If you tend to get nervous when presenting in front of crowds, then one way to
overcome this apprehension is to memorize the first few sentences of your
presentation. That way you'll crush your first few slides, and feel pretty
confident going into the rest of the talk. When you get to your slides that you
haven't entirely memorized though, just be careful that you...

### Do not read off your slides

This will totally obliterate your audience's interest in what you are saying. If
your slides already say everything you are going to say, then the audience may
no longer feel the need to listen to you since they can just read your slides
instead. Some members of the audience may try to keep listening to you, but they
will likely have a hard time doing so because their attention will be split
between your written words and your spoken words.

Also, reading directly off slides is just a lazy way to present that will almost
certainly annoy your audience. It doesn't require practice and turns your talk
into a monotonous lecture. This is another reason why your slides should have a
[minimal amount of text](#go-light-on-the-text-heavy-on-the-visuals). People
don't want to hear you go on and on about something, they want you to...

### Get to the point

Try to state the core idea behind your work, and why your audience should care
about it, as quickly and concisely as possible. Your audience almost certainly
*does not care* about how your new solar technology converts photons into
electricity. They almost certainly *will care* about how cheap it is, how much
money it will save them on their electric bill, and how soon they can expect to
receive a return on investment once they buy it. If this sounds like advertising
[that's because it is](#treat-your-talk-like-a-sales-pitch). When you're trying
to persuade someone to buy your product/read your paper/invest in your startup,
the first thing you need to ask yourself is "What's in it for them? Why do they
care?" The sooner you answer those questions during your presentation, the
sooner you earn your audience's attention.

Here's a trick I use to figure out how to explain a topic quickly without
beating around the bush. First, I write a paragraph explaining the idea in a
fair amount of detail. I don't focus on concision at all; my goal is just to
explain the topic as well as I can using as much text as I need. Once I'm done,
I go back and review the final sentence in that paragraph. More often than not,
that final sentence is the key idea I'm trying to convey to my reader or
listener. If it is, then I move that last sentence to the very beginning of my
explanation, and adjust the rest of my explanation to accommodate this change in
structure. When I do this I often find that many parts of my original paragraph
were entirely unnecessary to explain my key takeaway. I cut these useless parts
out, and the explanation becomes much simpler and more straightforward than
before.

After you've established the main idea behind your work and made it clear why
your audience should care, you can start to explain more of the context around
it (e.g., more background on the problem your idea solves and how it works). A
great way to do this is to...

### Give examples

People are hard-wired to recognize patterns and learn best by example, so you
should furnish your talk with concrete examples to help explain how your work
solves a particular problem. Great problem examples not only provide context as
to why your work is important, but can also excite your audience to see how your
work solves the problem. On the other hand, don't try to explain the insight
behind your idea first and then give an application of its usefulness, because
this can confuse and bore people.

For example, let's say you are giving a talk on why math is important. What you
*would not* want to do is spend ten minutes explaining all the rules of
arithmetic, and then briefly mention vaguely that math is the cornerstone of
technological progress. What you *would* want to say is, "You can learn how to
budget more effectively and save money by using math", or "In the 1960s humans
transcended the limitations of gravity and flew to space by using mathematical
formulas". Then, after you've earned the audience's interest with your stellar
examples, would you want to start explaining how arithmetic works.

You're probably going to give a talk on a topic much more complex than the
importance of math, though, and won't be able to use such simple and obvious
examples. That's not a problem, because examples are also effective for
explaining complex ideas as well. To explain a complex topic, choose quality
examples over a quantity of them. Start with a simple example that doesn't
illustrate all the complexities and edge-cases of your work, and then...

### Introduce complexity gradually

To explain a complex idea, start with a simple, limited example of the idea, and
then slowly layer complexity on to it throughout your presentation. For
instance, let's pretend I'm giving a talk on home winemaking (a recent hobby of
mine):

- First, here's the simplest example of how to make wine: Add grapes, water, and
  yeast to a clean bucket, wait a few weeks, and bam, you have alcoholic fruit
  juice. This works because yeast eat sugar (which grapes are full of) and turn
  it into alcohol. This process is called fermentation.

- Now let's make a stronger wine with a higher alcohol-to-water ratio (i.e., a
  higher ABV). To do this, add extra sugar to the bucket before fermentation
  begins. Since the yeast will have more sugar to eat, they will produce more
  alcohol. (Notice how I'm building off the prior example, which introduced the
  fundamental concept of fermentation). Unfortunately, this creates a new
  problem: there is a limit to how much alcohol yeast can live with, so our
  yeast may actually die from the alcohol they are producing before our wine
  reaches our desired ABV. No more yeast, no more alcohol, no stronger wine. (At
  this point I'm introducing a complication to winemaking). To fix this, we can
  use a strand of yeast with high alcohol tolerance. Such strands of yeast can
  withstand higher levels of alcohol and continue to convert sugar into alcohol.

- OK, we've got some strong wine, but now it tastes horrible. Let's make it
  sweeter. The obvious way to do this would be to simply add sugar to the wine
  after it's done fermenting. However, this won't work because there will still
  be yeast floating around in the fermented wine, and if we add more sugar to
  it, the yeast will just turn it into more alcohol. (Notice how I'm building
  off the concept of fermentation again. The difference between this example and
  the last example though is that in the previous example, we used fermentation
  to solve our problem and achieve a higher amount of alcohol, i.e. ABV, but in
  this example, fermentation *is* the problem because we don't want to increase
  the ABV). To solve this problem, we can add chemicals to our wine to stop the
  yeast from reproducing and prevent it from turning sugar into alcohol. Give
  the chemicals a day to do work their magic, and then we can add as much sugar
  as we want to our wine without worrying about our yeast turning it into more
  alcohol. (Here I've solved the problem by adding just a tad more complexity,
  with the introduction of chemicals to the winemaking process. Notice that I
  did not mention the exact chemicals used. Depending on the talk, those details
  may be unnecessary, or something I would like to push the audience to [ask
  about](#anticipate-and-prepare-for-questions))

When preparing slides for your example, I recommend putting the most basic
example on one slide, and then adding "appear" animations to reveal the
complications. Here more than ever, it's crucial that you use
[images](#go-light-on-the-text-heavy-on-the-visuals) to introduce the
complications, and not text. Otherwise your example devolves into bullet points,
which are boring and annoying.

### Provide full context when possible

Explain concepts as if your audience can't remember anything but your key idea
(assuming you've already established it) and what's visible on the current
slide. When speaking, always spell out acronyms and accompany technical terms
with their definitions. This is just another trick to reduce your audience's
cognitive load. Save them the trouble of remembering what all your technical
jargon means so that they can focus on comprehending why it's relevant to your
idea (and why your idea is relevant to them). Tread carefully here: although you
want to provide full context in your *talk*, you don't want do this on your
*slides*. This is because cramming too much context on your slides results in
walls of text that impose a cognitive burden on your audience and distract them
from what you are saying.

There's a very fine line between providing full context and providing too much
context. Give too little context, and your audience will be lost.
[Give too much](#get-to-the-point), and your audience will get confused. Either
way, they won't understand you. To determine the right amount of context
necessary for your talk, you will need to...

### Practice, practice, practice

Practice presenting often and with a variety of people. Practice presenting both
to people who do and do not have any background knowledge on what you are
talking about. Feedback from the uninformed audience can help you realize when
certain ideas which seem "obvious" to are not actually that obvious to your
audience (and thus require that you [provide more
context](#provide-full-context-when-possible) when mentioning them). The
informed audience can give you a way to practice answering technical questions
about the work. If you're lucky to have a mentor with good presentation skills,
then ask them how to make the presentation more concise and engaging.

When I gave my ICSE 2024 practice talk to my mentors at the University of
Central Florida (UCF), I learned more about how to put a fun spin on my ideas
and how to better sell myself during my presentation. For example, since my
advisor Dr. Paul Gazillo had a lot of background knowledge on the work, he was
able to recommend a few analogies I could use to better explain my research. On
the other hand, the other UCF faculty who only had general computer science
knowledge but little knowledge about my work were able to give me more general
presentation tips.

Meanwhile, when I practiced presenting my talk to my (very patient) girlfriend,
I learned how to convey complex ideas more concisely. Since my girlfriend has
very little computer science knowledge, she was willing to ask more "obvious"
questions about concepts that I implicitly assumed the audience would
understand, but apparently did not explain clearly enough. By presenting to a
non-technical audience, I improved at expressing my thoughts with minimal
technical jargon. I also had to learn how to not get mired down in the details
of my work, since that would also confuse her. In short, I had to learn how to
present using the right amount of context. This often required me to...

### Highlight key points, and cut out the rest

Emphasize the important, exciting, and surprising parts of your work, and omit
everything else from your main talk that doesn't serve this purpose. When you
present a figure with data (be it a table, chart, graph, code snippet,
whatever), ask yourself "What do I want the audience to glean from this?" If
there's something in the chart that you can highlight to make this point
clearer, then do it! Do not try and make your audience read your table and
figure out on their own why the data explains how much better your work is than
prior work. Most of them won't even try to. Just tell them instead.

Once you determine what the key part of your figure is and have highlighted it,
then consider removing the rest of the figure entirely and just leaving the
highlighted information on the slide. This will help you [get to the
point](#get-to-the-point) when explaining the importance of your data. If you
have highlighted multiple parts of the same figure, see if you can use some sort
of average (i.e., mean, median, or mode) to summarize this information, and
replace the figure with this average. Make sure to leave the full figure in
after the end of your presentation though, since this can help you [answer
questions](#anticipate-and-prepare-for-questions).

Sometimes it can be useful to present a large, complex figure to convey just
how complicated and difficult the problem you are solving is. If you do this, my
only advice is to do so quickly. You don't want to risk your audience actually
trying to read/understand the figure and getting distracted or confused. You
just want to shock them with it, and then take it away before they can think too
hard about it. If they really want to know more, they'll ask you about it.

### Stick the landing

End your talk with a slide that reiterates your main points, presents your photo
along with your contact info, and displays QR codes or short links to pages
where the audience can learn more about your work. When you reach your
conclusion slide don't read anything on it; simply tell the audience that you
have finished your talk and are ready to accept questions. Don't proceed to a
"Thank you" or "Questions" slide, because they provide no meaningful content to
your presentation. The last slide of your talk is likely to get more screen-time
than any other and is your last chance to sell yourself to your audience, so
don't squander it!

Leave your conclusion slide up on the screen while you await questions so that
the audience can record your contact info and read and re-read your key points.
The audience may use these key points to form questions, so [prepare
accordingly](#anticipate-and-prepare-for-questions). If you need to go to an
extra slide to answer a question that's fine; just try to jump back to your
conclusion slide afterward.

Finally, make sure to finish your talk ON TIME. If you run out of time in the
middle of your presentation, simply stop and say "I had more slides prepared,
but I am out of time and so will end now." Don't ask your audience for
permission to continue - they will likely feel bad and say sure, but believe me
they won't appreciate you for taking more of their time. This is especially true
if your talk is the last one before a coffee or lunch break.

### Be humble

Perhaps the most important advice I can give on how to improve at presenting is
to remain humble and accept the fact that the first few presentations you make
(even after armed with this advice) will likely suck. It can take weeks to
prepare an excellent talk, and you may need to throw out your first, second, and
third drafts before you arrive at something half-decent. That's OK though - most
talks suck, so a half-decent talk is often all you need to stand out. Keep these
rules in mind when you attend your next presentation and you'll see what I mean.
The good news is that as long as you pay attention to what you're doing wrong,
and remain receptive to feedback, you will only continue to improve. It is
difficult, but not impossible, to make a great presentation that doesn't suck.
