---
layout: post
title: How I wasted $400 on a Keyboard
date: 2025-06-07 09:00:00 EDT
categories: blog
---

If you can already work effectively and comfortably on a normal keyboard, don't
waste your money on an ergonomic one.

In this post I talk about why I bought the ZSA Voyager, why I didn't really
like it, and why I ultimately returned to using a traditional QWERTY keyboard.

## Why did I get a new keyboard?

I purchased an ergonomic keyboard for three reasons.

1. **Enjoyment**: I enjoy typing on my laptop's keyboard, and thought I would enjoy
   typing even more on a higher quality board.

1. **Comfort**: I like programming and want to ensure that my hands stay
   healthy so that I can continue to write code for the rest of my life.

1. **Productivity**: I hoped that an ergonomic keyboard would make me more
   productive.

I thought that an ergonomic keyboard would help me achieve these goals, but was
wrong on all accounts:

1. **Displeasure**: The learning curve for an ergonomic board is so ridiculously
   long that I began to hate typing. I thought that this feeling would go away
   if I just practiced more, but after several months of practice it didn't.

1. **Pain**: Despite trying to follow proper typing posture when using my new
   board, I ended up hurting myself in various ways.

1. **Inefficiency**: My productivity tanked for months because typing was no longer
   second nature to me, and I was perpetually distracted from working on other
   tasks because I felt a constant need to practice typing.

I am going to explain all these points in more detail later on in this post,
but first I'll explain why I specifically chose to purchase the Voyager.

## Why did I choose the Voyager?

I decided to buy the ZSA Voyager, and not one of the other high-end ergonomic
keyboards out there (e.g., the Dygma Defy, the Kinesis Advantage 2, the
Glove80), because it seemed to have the most consistently positive reviews
online, and (this is going to sound immature) honestly looked the coolest to
me. I had seen a bevy of YouTube videos lauding and magnifying the Voyager for
its ergonomic design, sleek structure, and productivity-boosting customization
options. On Reddit, people rave about the board and all its features. I even
have a friend who owns this board, and he persuaded me to get it instead of the
other options.

I'm now convinced that most people who praise the Voyager either:

1. Actually suffer from the same problems I did, and tell themselves that they
   love the Voyager to cope with spending a colossal amount of money on it. I
   think this is the more likely option because people are usually reluctant to
   admit when they are wrong.

1. Were not skilled typists to begin with, and the Voyager was the first board
   they learned to type properly on, and so typing on the board actually feels
   natural to them. I find this option unlikely because the Voyager is such an
   expensive and niche keyboard that I'd expect someone to be at least somewhat
   interested in keyboards and/or typing before buying one.

To explain why I feel this way, I'm going to share my journey with the board.
Before I do that though, I think I should provide additional context by
describing the board itself.

## The Voyager

<div class="row row-centered">
<img src="/assets/img/voyager-512.jpg"
alt="My ZSA Voyager"
class="rounded-border"
>
</div>

The Voyager, shown above, is a very unique keyboard. Here's a list of its key
features, starting with the ones that I actually liked (or could at least
appreciate), and ending with the ones that I really didn't care for.

- **Split design**: This enables one to "open up their shoulders" (that's what
  I often see and hear people say anyway) when typing by placing the two halves
  of the board directly in front of them, shoulder-width apart.

- **Column-staggered layout**: As opposed to the traditional row-staggered
  layout, this layout is supposed to better mimic the shape of one's hand
  (e.g., the middle column of the board is the most aggressively staggered
  because the middle finger is the longest finger).

- **Small number of keys**: Each half of the board offers a mere 24 keys, with
  2 extra thumb keys each, for a total of 52 keys. The idea here is to
  customize your board using "layers" (more on this later) so that you can type
  with a small number of keys with minimal finger movement.

- **Hot-swappable switches**: You can easily change out the key switches the
  Voyager comes with for different ones. I chose the Kailh Choc Pro Red
  switches and didn't have a problem with them, and I'm not really into
  mechanical keyboards all that much, so I didn't swap my switches.

- **LED back lights**: The entire board is back-lit with LEDs. I personally see
  LEDs as a gimmick and don't care for them, so this meant nothing to me. In
  fact, it actually makes the board worse in my opinion because it requires
  that the board be wired to power the LEDs, which leads me to my next point...

- **Fully-wired**: The board offers no wireless connection features. To use it,
  you need to connect the left half to your computer, and then use another wire
  to connect the left half to the right. These wires clutter one's desk and
  make the board more annoying to set up, so I'd much rather ZSA had ditched
  the cute LEDs in favor of convenient wireless connection options.

Now on to my journey learning to use the Voyager, and why I eventually decided
it just wasn't for me.

## The board arrives, and the struggle begins

I received and unboxed my Voyager in early January, and could immediately tell
that learning how to use it was going to be difficult. I was prepared for this
though, and began to practice doggedly in order to return to my former speed
(around 90 WPM).

The main reason why it was so hard for me to learn to type on the Voyager is
that I don't strictly adhere to "proper" technique when touch typing with
QWERTY. For one thing, I usually use my left pointer finger to press the C key
instead of using my left middle finger. For another, I also often press the B
key with my right pointer finger instead of my left (on a traditional
row-staggered keyboard, this is just more comfortable). These quirks made it
especially difficult for me to type on the Voyager, because its split design
forced me to follow textbook touch typing technique.

The problem with learning to type with QWERTY "the right way" is that it makes
it much more painfully obvious just how poor of a layout QWERTY is for typing
(at least for English). It's design is lopsided such that many more words can
be typed using only the left hand than the right hand. The only vowel on the
home row is the letter A, which means that in order to type most words, you
need to move your fingers around the keyboard more to reach more vowels.
Finally, some of the key placements are just strange (e.g., J, one of the least
frequently-used English letters, gets a spot on the home row under the right
pointer finger). These problems aren't as salient on a non-split keyboard,
since you can adapt your typing to accommodate some of these issues (e.g., you
can make up for the lopsidedness by typing the B key with your right hand like
I do). With a split keyboard, however, you just have to live with them.

## I accidentally give myself RSI problems

So I started practicing typing each day on my new board for 30-60 minutes, and
soon began suffering from symptoms of repetitive strain injury (RSI). My
wrists, forearms, and elbows all hurt. It took me weeks to realize this, but it
was because of how I was typing on my new board.

First of all, I began to suffer wrist pain that I had never felt before when
typing on my laptop. This is because the Voyager comes with no palm rests, and
unlike my laptop keyboard, isn't low profile enough to prevent me needing to
reach up with my palms in order to type on it. As I would later learn, reaching
with one's palms like this while typing is a sure way to injure one's wrists.
While I tried to avoid reaching like this by typing with my hands hovering
above the keyboard (a technique recommended by ergonomists, and that
programmers such as the Primagen claim to follow), this did not alleviate my
wrist pain at all, and actually led to my next problem.

My elbows started hurting. I think the reason for this is because since I was
hovering my hands above the keyboard to avoid wrist pain, I had to keep my arms
bent at a 90-110 degree angle at all times in order to type. Again, I had seen
ergonomists online (and in a book on RSI that my advisor had lent me) recommend
this. This problem also went away once I stopped using the Voyager.

Finally, my forearms began to hurt. I still don't know what exactly caused this
pain, but it was worse in my right arm than in my left (I am right-handed), and
ceased once I returned to using my laptop keyboard.

## I give up once

By this point I had had the board for two months, and while I could type at
about 90 WPM again (but definitely didn't feel that fast), my new-found pain
had not gone away. Since injury-prevention was one of the main reasons I got
the Voyager in the first place, I decided to stop using the board so as to not
risk injuring myself further. I had had the board for too long to return it
though, so I instead boxed it up and placed it in my closet.

I still didn't want to give up learning the board though, and its presence
lingered in my mind.

## I try again

Two weeks passed, and was still thinking about the Voyager. I couldn't believe
that the board could have been the cause of my injuries, and instead suspected
that I was to blame. There are plenty of ways that I could have hurt myself
that wouldn't have been the board's fault. Maybe I practiced too much and too
hard. Or perhaps my being forced to touch type properly on QWERTY was causing
me discomfort. Or I could have simply had poor posture.

So I decided to give the board another try. I resolved to do three things
differently this time around:

1. **I would ditch QWERTY**: QWERTY is actually a rather uncomfortable layout
   for typing, mostly because of its uneven and impractical distribution of
   commonly-used keys. So I opted to try a new, more efficient layout. After
   doing some research on the [many popular keyboard
   layouts](https://cyanophage.github.io/) out there, I settled on learning
   [Gallium](https://github.com/GalileoBlues/Gallium/). I chose to use Gallium
   for three reasons:

   1. Gallium has more commonly-used letters on the home-row than QWERTY does.
   1. Typing in Gallium involves typing fewer same finger bigrams than QWERTY.
      Same finger bigrams (SFBs) are pairs of adjacent letters in words that
      must be typed with the same finger in order to follow "proper" technique.
      For instance, try to type the word "decade" on QWERTY using proper touch
      typing technique. Each time you type the bigram "de", you need to use
      your middle finger to press both keys. SFBs are uncomfortable to type,
      and QWERTY has many more of them than more modern layouts like Gallium
      do.
   1. I can easily configure my Voyager to use the Gallium layout. ZSA offers
      an online tool called Oryx for customizing one's keyboard layout, and
      this made it easy to configure my board to use Gallium instead of QWERTY.
      This is in contrast to other modern layouts like Graphite, which require
      changing the shifted versions of some keys, a feature that Oryx does not
      support. While I could learn to use software like QMK to do this, I
      really prefer using a GUI interface to configure my board instead of
      modifying configuration files.

2. **I would focus on my posture**: I would try harder to "hover" my hands over
   the keyboard, sit with my back straight, and keep my elbows at a 90 degree
   angle (or slightly obtuse even) without sticking them out to the side
   (something I was doing earlier).

3. **I would design my own symbol layer**: Since the Voyager has so few keys
   compared to a standard QWERTY keyboard, in order to access extra keys such
   as symbols, one needs to create _layers_ for their board. A layer is a
   separate keyboard configuration that one can activate by holding down or
   pressing another key. For example, on a standard keyboard, holding down the
   shift key enters a layer which replaces lowercase letters with their capital
   variants and numbers with symbols.

   I was previously using a symbol layer that a friend had designed for me, but
   was finding it not quite to my liking, so I decided that I would design my
   own. I started by doing some research on the topic of symbol layers, and
   stumbled upon [this
   post](https://getreuer.info/posts/keyboards/symbol-layer/index.html) by
   Pascal Getreuer, an applied mathematician at Google who sometimes writes
   about keyboards and keyboard layouts. I followed some of the advice in his
   post to design a symbol layer that I was happy with. You can check the layer
   out for yourself below.

   <div style="padding-top: 60%; position: relative;">
   	<iframe src="https://configure.zsa.io/embed/voyager/layouts/6JpPX/latest/1" style="border: 0; height: 100%; left: 0; position: absolute; top: 0; width: 100%"></iframe>
   </div>

   Notice how the delimiters (e.g., '[' and ']') and certain special characters
   like '>' and '-' are adjacent to each other. This is to make certain common
   bigrams one types when programming, such as "()" and "->", easier to type.

I was optimistic that all these improvements to my typing experience would make
typing on the Voyager more enjoyable and less painful - and to a certain degree
it did!

## All is well?

I spent two months re-learning how to type with Gallium, and getting the hang
of my snazzy new symbols layer. I used [keybr](https://www.keybr.com/) to
master each individual letter, [monkeytype](https://monkeytype.com/) and
[ttyper](https://github.com/max-niederman/ttyper) to practice typing
commonly-used words, [speedtyper.dev](https://www.speedtyper.dev/) to practice
writing code, and finally [Ngram
Type](https://ranelpadon.github.io/ngram-type/) to practice typing common
fragments of words. By the end of the two months, I could type rather
consistently at 70 WPM, and on monkeytype and ttyper I sometimes reached 90 or
even 100 WPM.

I eventually began re-learning the keyboard shortcuts for my most commonly-used
applications (Brave, Vim, Okular, VS Code), and while that was certainly not
fun, after a week or so the muscle memory began to sink in.

So all seems well, right? Except there's still a few problems.

- **Typing on the Voyager still hurts**: I read a book on RSI prevention,
  watched hours of YouTube videos on proper typing technique, and even bought
  small palm rests to help keep my wrists and forearms straight while typing on
  the Voyager; but all to no avail. Try as I might, my wrists, forearms, and
  especially my inner elbows still hurt. I really wanted to make the Voyager my
  daily driver, but not if it meant injuring myself.

- **I can't stand having so few keys**: I hate having only 52 keys at my
  disposal because it means that in order to use modifiers like shift, control,
  meta, and alt, I need turn turn some keys into dual-function keys.
  Dual-function keys are keys that perform one action when pressed, but another
  action when held for some configured amount of time. Even though I used the
  Voyager for months, dual-function keys never really felt natural to me. I'd
  much rather have more keys each do one thing, and one thing only, even if it
  means I sometimes have to reach for them.

  Exacerbating this issue is the fact that since the Voyager has so few keys,
  you will almost certainly need to create layers for less frequently used
  characters such as symbols. Each time you create a layer however, you the
  need to add a way to access it. The most direct way to do this is with more
  dual-function keys. Since I don't really like dual-function keys, this made
  working with layers rather painful, which is unfortunate because I feel like
  layers are one of the Voyager's main features.

- **I get second thoughts on learning Gallium**: While Gallium is much more
  comfortable than QWERTY, all software today is made with QWERTY-focused
  keyboard shortcuts, so it's just much more practical to follow convention and
  use QWERTY. A perfect example of this is with Vim: In Vim, the keys hjkl are
  used to move around because they are all right next to each other on the home
  row of a traditional QWERTY keyboard. With Gallium, this is no longer the
  case, and hjkl are instead all over the board. I was able to mitigate this
  issue by creating a navigation layer that places the arrow keys in the same
  positions as hjkl on a QWERTY keyboard. I used this layer to move around in
  Vim more naturally, but honestly this felt like a shim I was using to solve a
  problem I had just created for myself.

## I accept that it's just not meant to be

With all these issues in mind, I decide that the Voyager and I are just
incompatible, and put it back in its box. At least for now. I still have it in
my closet, and maybe one day I'll give it another go. Perhaps next time will be
different, and I'll be able to type on the board without pain. If not, I can
always just sell it.

## Random notes

- **I didn't just waste money on the board**: I also decided to purchase the
  magnetic mount attachments that ZSA sells so that I could try tenting my
  keyboard later. These also ended up being a waste of money, since it turns
  out I could just tent my board with magnetic phone stands. I tried using the
  mounts a few times anyway to mount my board to camera tripods so that I could
  use it while standing, but this felt awful and awkward.

- **Gallium is (probably) still better than QWERTY**: Although I've pretty much
  stopped using Gallium, I still think it's a better layout than QWERTY. The
  [rolls](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1W0jhfqJI2ueJ2FNseR4YAFpNfsUM-_FlREHbpNGmC2o/edit?tab=t.6r1v629nms0d)
  are better, commonly-used vowels like a, e, and i are all on the home row,
  and there are much fewer same finger bigrams compared to QWERTY. I've even
  downloaded [Kanata](https://github.com/jtroo/kanata), a keyboard remapper, so
  that I can type on Gallium on my laptop. I still practice Gallium every now
  and then for fun.

- **I've made this mistake before**: This isn't the first time I've wasted
  money on a keyboard and wasted time trying to learn a new keyboard layout!
  When I was in undergrad I taught myself Colemak, and bought a 100% keyboard
  from WASD Keyboards, with Halloween-themed key caps that matched the Colemak
  layout. I practiced for months, but Colemak never really "clicked" for me
  like QWERTY does, so I stopped using the layout and the keyboard. Two years
  ago I tried picking both back up again, and got fairly fast, but after about
  a month I still didn't feel happy with Colemak, and gave away my fancy
  candied keyboard.
